README.md, before:

[![Build Status](https://github.com/HITS-AIN/hipster/actions/workflows/python-package.yml/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://github.com/HITS-AIN/hipster/actions/workflows/python-package.yml?branch=main)
[![Documentation Status](https://readthedocs.org/projects/spherinator/badge/?version=latest)](https://spherinator.readthedocs.io/en/latest/?badge=latest)
![versions](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.11%20%7C%203.12%20%7C%203.13-blue)

# HiPSter

[Spherinator](https://github.com/HITS-AIN/Spherinator) and `HiPSter` are tools to provide much needed explorative access and visualization for multimodal data from extremely large astrophysical datasets, ranging from exascale cosmological simulations to multi-billion object observational galaxy surveys. `Spherinator` uses dimensionality reduction to learn a low-dimensional representation of galaxy structure, and `HiPSter` creates a interactive hierarchical spherical vizualization of the entire dataset. They currently support multichannel maps or images as input. `Spherinator` uses [PyTorch Lightning](https://lightning.ai/docs/pytorch/stable/) to implement a convolutional neural network (CNN) based variational autoencoder (VAE) with a spherical latent space.
`HiPSter` creates HiPS tilings and a catalog which can be visualized interactively on the surface of a sphere using [Aladin Lite](https://github.com/cds-astro/aladin-lite).

<p align="center">
  <img src="docs/assets/P404_f2.png" width="400" height="400">
</p>


## Installation

```bash
pip install git+https://github.com/HITS-AIN/HiPSter
```

## Documentation

[Read The Docs](https://spherinator.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html)


## Acknowledgments

Funded by the European Union. This work has received funding from the European High-Performance Computing Joint Undertaking (JU) and Belgium, Czech Republic, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Norway, and Spain under grant agreement No 101093441.

Views and opinions expressed are however those of the author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union or the European High Performance Computing Joint Undertaking (JU) and Belgium, Czech Republic, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Norway, and Spain. Neither the European Union nor the granting authority can be held responsible for them.


## License

This project is licensed under the [Apache-2.0 License](http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0).


## Citation

If you use HiPSter in your research, we provide a [citation](./CITATION.cff) to use:

```bibtex
@article{Polsterer_Spherinator_and_HiPSter_2024,
author = {Polsterer, Kai Lars and Doser, Bernd and Fehlner, Andreas and Trujillo-Gomez, Sebastian},
title = {{Spherinator and HiPSter: Representation Learning for Unbiased Knowledge Discovery from Simulations}},
url = {https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.03810},
doi = {10.48550/arXiv.2406.03810},
year = {2024}
}
```

Commit message:

brief description of CLI usage and link to Spherinator docu

README.md, after:

[![Build Status](https://github.com/HITS-AIN/hipster/actions/workflows/python-package.yml/badge.svg?branch=main)](https://github.com/HITS-AIN/hipster/actions/workflows/python-package.yml?branch=main)
[![Documentation Status](https://readthedocs.org/projects/spherinator/badge/?version=latest)](https://spherinator.readthedocs.io/en/latest/?badge=latest)
![versions](https://img.shields.io/badge/python-3.11%20%7C%203.12%20%7C%203.13-blue)

# HiPSter

The `HiPSter` package is designed to be used in conjunction with the
[Spherinator](https://github.com/HITS-AIN/Spherinator) package.
`HiPSter` are tools to provide much needed explorative access and visualization for multimodal data
from extremely large astrophysical datasets, ranging from exascale cosmological simulations to
multi-billion object observational galaxy surveys.
`HiPSter` creates HiPS tilings and a catalog which can be visualized interactively on the surface of
a sphere using [Aladin Lite](https://github.com/cds-astro/aladin-lite).


<p align="center">
  <img src="docs/assets/P404_f2.png" width="400" height="400">
</p>


## Installation

```bash
pip install git+https://github.com/HITS-AIN/HiPSter
```

## Usage

The `HiPSter` package provides a CLI to create HiPS tilings and a catalog from the spherical latent
space representation.

```bash
hipster --config <path_to_config_file>
```

For more details run `hipster --help` or check the [documentation](https://spherinator.readthedocs.io/en/latest/hipster.html#command-line-interface).


## Documentation

The `HiPSter` documentation is part of the Spherinator documentation and can be found at:

[Read The Docs](https://spherinator.readthedocs.io/en/latest/hipster.html)


## Acknowledgments

Funded by the European Union. This work has received funding from the European High-Performance Computing Joint Undertaking (JU) and Belgium, Czech Republic, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Norway, and Spain under grant agreement No 101093441.

Views and opinions expressed are however those of the author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union or the European High Performance Computing Joint Undertaking (JU) and Belgium, Czech Republic, France, Germany, Greece, Italy, Norway, and Spain. Neither the European Union nor the granting authority can be held responsible for them.


## License

This project is licensed under the [Apache-2.0 License](http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0).


## Citation

If you use HiPSter in your research, we provide a [citation](./CITATION.cff) to use:

```bibtex
@article{Polsterer_Spherinator_and_HiPSter_2024,
author = {Polsterer, Kai Lars and Doser, Bernd and Fehlner, Andreas and Trujillo-Gomez, Sebastian},
title = {{Spherinator and HiPSter: Representation Learning for Unbiased Knowledge Discovery from Simulations}},
url = {https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.03810},
doi = {10.48550/arXiv.2406.03810},
year = {2024}
}
```
